---
slug: gradient
title: 'Animating gradient border'
tags: [CSS]
draft: true
---

Gradients aren't supported for borders in out of the box in CSS. But there's a few ways to achieve it. Here's an example of an animating gradient border on an element with border radius.

<!--truncate-->

This is what we're going to be making here:

<div className="element-with-gradient-border-and-animation"></div>

Since gradients aren't supported for borders we have to get into

### Making a background element

There's a few ways to create the background element. An 'easy' but hard to understand solution is with the `border-image` property. But that one doesn't support `border-radius` which you often need.

Let's start by laying out a new element underneath the element where we want the border, and make it overflow by `2px` to each side.

```css
.element-with-gradient-border:after {
  content: '';
  position: absolute;
  z-index: -1;
  inset: 0;
  margin: -2px;
  border-radius: calc(var(--border-radius) + 2px);
  background: linear-gradient(60deg, cyan, pink, darkgreen);
}
```

In order for the `pseudo-element` to show we have to give it some content, an empty string is fine, otherwise the element won't show.
We position it with `absolute` and a negative `z-index` to make it sit right underneath our original element.
Then there's a few ways of sizing it correctly. You can use `width` and `height` set to 100% + the amount you want to overflow. But this gets impacting by padding on the original element. I think it's nicer to give it `inset: 0;` which is the shorthand for setting the top/right/bottom/left properties (not supported by Safari <15 though). This makes the element's sides snap to the borders of the original element. Then you can simply add a negative margin corresponding to the border thickness you want, and it will overflow correctly.

For border-radius you could just use `border-radius: inherit;` to make the property match the original element. I think it looks better to add a slightly higher (1-2 px) border-radius than the original element though. Otherwise the corners look slightly square. We can a CSS variable for the border-radius and then add a few pixels to that value with the `calc` function.

Finally add a background with a linear-gradient and a few colors. This is then what we get:

<div className="element-with-gradient-border" style={{ backgroundColor: 'transparent' }}></div>

### Adding the animation

Let's look at animating the border a bit. The trick we will use here is to use the `background-size` which set the size of an element´s background image. We will use this to make the background (the gradient color) larger than the original element. Then we make add an animation that moves it back and forth a bit. It's sort of like looking through a narrow lens at a large picture, and then moving that picture back and forth. If we don't set a high background size, then the background is gonna wrap to the other side, and we would see a sudden change from one color to the other, instead of the gradient we want.

<div className="element-with-gradient-border-and-animation" style={{ backgroundColor: 'transparent' }}></div>

```css
.element-with-gradient-border-and-animation:after {
  /* ... */
  background-size: 300% 300%;
  animation: animatedgradient 4s ease alternate infinite;
}

@keyframes animatedgradient {
  0% {
    background-position: 0% 50%;
  }
  50% {
    background-position: 100% 50%;
  }
  100% {
    background-position: 0% 50%;
  }
}
```
